in a letter to his dear friend lucillus
stoic floss for seneca wrote
there are more things lucillus likely to
frighten us
than there are to crush us we suffer
more often
in imagination than in reality
end quote chronic warriors
tend to be more occupied by the future
than by present circumstances
during the day and even during the night
their thoughts
wander in the mysterious realm of what's
yet to come
plotting planning and calculating on how
to tackle
an unfortunate fate that might rear its
ugly head
but even though they wish to control the
future they've never gone beyond the
confines
of the present this is because the
future doesn't exist
except in our minds we can't live in the
future
and we can't predict it sure we can plan
for things that might come but the
present usually
unfolds in different and often
surprising ways
still many of us fix our attention on
the unknown
and fantasize endlessly about how things
that we can't possibly predict
present themselves to us seneca observed
this phenomenon in his friend lucilius
as well as in the people around him he
counter-attacked this often tiresome and
destructive stance
towards the illusory domain of the
future with
stoic reasoning explaining why worrying
about it is pointless
and advising us on what to do instead
this video explores
seneca's antidotes to worry and
groundless fears
the idea that the future doesn't exist
doesn't deny the passing of time
it doesn't deny that what's happening
right now will soon be the past
and that we're constantly exposed to a
stream of novelty
like a mountaintop faces an enduring
blizzard
the blizzard cannot be controlled comes
from all directions
and at different speeds and brings along
snowflakes in all shapes and sizes
the mountain is unable to predict what's
coming it can only endure
and watch the snowflakes come and go as
we
watch moments come and go from what we
call
the future to the past thus
we know that something is coming but no
matter what we try to make of it
and how well we try to prepare for it
we'll always be shooting in the dark
that's why the future as we imagine it
has no ground to stand on
at the end of the day as the future is
nothing more than ideas
which vary from wild guesses to
prognoses
based on past results nevertheless
many people are over encumbered by these
ideas
causing them to suffer from groundless
fears based on nothing but speculation
instead of truth as seneca stated
for truth has its own definite
boundaries but
that which arises from uncertainty is
delivered over to guesswork
and the irresponsible license of our
frightened might
he observed that some things affect us
before they appear
and other things affect us when they in
reality
never will according to seneca this is
the case
because we're habitually exaggerating or
imagining
or anticipating sorrow seneca's letter
goes on to describe
the nature of the mind telling lesilius
that it sometimes creates false shapes
of evil when there's no evil to be found
or as he states it twists into the worst
construction
some word of doubtful meaning or fancy
some personal grudge
to be more serious than it really is
considering not how angry the enemy is
but to what length he may go if he is
angry
and quote this human habit of worrying
isn't just
unpleasant there's plenty of scientific
evidence that suggests
that worrying can make people sick
literally
this means that even though the future
doesn't exist
we're worrying ourselves sick because of
it
luckily seneca's writings provide us
with antidotes
now what antidotes did seneca propose to
fight this human habit of worrying
his remedy comes down to fortifying the
mind with
certain ideas and truth about reality as
well as changing the stance we take
towards fortune and misfortune first of
all
he reminds his friend lucilius of the
fact that although many unfortunate
things have overcome him he always stood
his ground
so it seems that somehow he was always
able to cope
when we look at the history of our own
lives we may conclude that what we
perceive as a catastrophe in advance
usually turns out to be different than
we had imagined
often times we suffer less than we
anticipate
the irony is that the majority of the
suffering
happens before the actual event takes
place
for example we're anxious about taking
an exam
and the weeks before we worry about it
every day
will i black out will i screw it up
but the anxiety we experience during the
exam
is neglible compared to what we endured
the weeks before
the root of this fear lies in our
beliefs regarding the consequences
of failing the exam we might think if i
fail my life is over
or if i don't pass this exam then it's
true what they say
i'm indeed a failure but these beliefs
aren't true
simply because the consequences they
anticipate haven't happened yet
and cannot be predicted even though some
catastrophic beliefs about the future
may be plausible
as long as they are not coming to
fruition at this very moment
what's to be disturbed about or as
seneca stated
you may retort with the question how am
i to know
whether my sufferings are real or
imaginary
here's the rule for such matters we are
tormented
either by things present or by things to
come or
by both as to things present the
decision is easy
suppose that your person enjoys freedom
and health
and that you do not suffer from any
external injury
as to what may happen to it in the
future we shall see
later on today there's nothing wrong
with it
end quote in the same letter seneca
encourages his friend lucilius to be
careful about
outside influences when it comes to his
personal situation
according to seneca it's better to trust
in ourselves and take counsel with our
feelings independently
as we know our affairs better than
anyone else does
we're easily affected by the opinions
and views of other people
there are many individuals out there
with narrow-minded and even delusional
views of reality
claiming that they can predict the
future and gladly plant
their seeds of fear in our minds making
us uneasy about the situation we're in
seneca urges his friend to consult
reason to see
if he doesn't convert quote unquote what
is not an
evil into what is an evil
so the antidote is that we carefully
discern
between imagination and reality as soon
as we find out that our fears are based
on irrational thinking
or fantasies or exaggerations our
worries
are debunked
another antidote that seneca proposes is
a change of attitude
towards the things to come seneca
displays
a certain open-mindedness in his letter
to lucilius
urging him not to conclude too hastily
regarding the nature of what fortune
provides
fortune in this case refers to the
ancient deity fortuna
the goddess of chance luck and fate
looking at our human ignorance not only
about what will happen
and how these events will play out but
also concerning the nature
of these events and how they exactly
affect our lives
it's better to be careful when judging
fate in some cases
the misfortune we anticipate indeed
comes to fruition
however events sometimes take such a
radical and unexpected turn
that against all odds we're getting off
the hook
we can see this happening in a buddhist
story about a man who is followed by a
tiger
jumps into an old well and encounters a
snake at the bottom
he holds on tightly to a root poking out
of the wall
which is getting eaten away by mice his
fate seemed to be sealed
but then out of the blue fortune grants
him a way out
therefore hardship can fall upon us at
any given time but so can a stroke of
luck
in horrible circumstances even bad
fortune is fickle
seneca stated so his antidote is to stay
open-minded about the future
knowing that we can't judge the nature
of an event before it has happened
and his consequences lay bare i quote
let us then look carefully into the
matter
it is likely that some troubles will
befall us
but it is not a present fact how often
has the unexpected happened
how often has the expected never come to
pass
and even though it is ordained to be
what does it avail to run out to meet
your suffering
you will suffer soon enough when it
arrives so
look forward meanwhile to better things
and quote this doesn't mean that we
should deny
that bad things might happen seneca
doesn't encourage his friend to be
ignorant
of the terrible fates that could occur
he does advocate
for observing with care on the one hand
it's unwise to be in denial of
misfortune on the other end we shouldn't
let the smallest
sign of adversity throw us into a panic
so the key is walking the middle path
between
ignorance and obsession on which we
mindfully assess
the situation at hand while keeping all
options open
moreover if we keep an open mind about
the nature of events
knowing that not everything is what it
seems and that fate is capricious
like a winter storm we'll realize that
our judgments about
future and even present events are often
misguided
and are fears concerning them groundless
and even if it's certain that misfortune
is coming our way
if it's not yet arrived then why spend
the time beforehand
suffering in our imagination
thank you for watching
[Music]
you